Version 2.x
===========

.. _version-2-1-0:

Version 2.1.0 (unreleased)
--------------------------

Improvements:

- Require GEOS >= 3.7, NumPy >= 1.16, and Python >= 3.8 (#1802)
- Add a ``handle_nan`` parameter to ``shapely.linestrings()`` and ``shapely.linearrings()``
  to allow, skip, or error on nonfinite (NaN / Inf) coordinates. The default
  behaviour (allow) is backwards compatible (#1594).

.. _version-2-0-6:

Version 2.0.6 (2024-08-19)
--------------------------

Bug fixes:

- Fix compatibility with NumPy 2.1.0 (#2099).

Wheels are available for Python 3.13 (and still include GEOS 3.11.4).

.. _version-2-0-5:

Version 2.0.5 (2024-07-13)
--------------------------

Bug fixes:

- Fix Point x/y/z attributes to return Python floats (#2074).
- Fix affinity for Apple silicon with NumPy 2.0 by reverting matmul, and
  use direct matrix multiplication instead (#2085).

Packaging related:

- Binary wheels on PyPI include GEOS 3.11.4 from 2024-06-05 (#2086).
- universal2 wheels are removed for macOS since both x86_64 and arm64 wheels
  are provided (#1990).
- Replace pkg_resources, prepend numpy include dirs (#2071).

.. _version-2-0-4:

Version 2.0.4 (2024-04-16)
--------------------------

Bug fixes:

- Fix bug in ``to_wkt`` with multiple empty Z geometries (#2012).
- Fix bug in ``to_ragged_array`` for an array of Points with missing values (#2034).

Wheels for Python versions >= 3.9 will be compatible with the upcoming NumPy 2.0
release (as well as with supported NumPy 1.x versions).

.. _version-2-0-3:

Version 2.0.3 (2024-02-16)
--------------------------

Bug fixes:

- Fix regression in the ``oriented_envelope`` ufunc to accept array-like input
  in case of GEOS<3.12 (#1929).

Packaging related:

- The binary wheels are not yet compatible with a future NumPy 2.0 release,
  therefore a ``numpy<2`` upper pin was added to the requirements (#1972).
- Upgraded the GEOS version in the binary wheel distributions to 3.11.3.

.. _version-2-0-2:

Version 2.0.2 (2023-10-12)
--------------------------

Bug fixes:

- Fix regression in the (in)equality comparison (``geom1 == geom2``) using ``__eq__`` to
  not ignore the z-coordinates (#1732).
- Fix ``MultiPolygon()`` constructor to accept polygons without holes (#1850).
- Fix :func:`.minimum_rotated_rectangle` (:func:`.oriented_envelope`) to always return
  the minimum area solution (instead of minimum width). In practice, it will use the
  GEOS implementation only for GEOS 3.12+, and for older GEOS versions fall back to the
  implementation that was included in Shapely < 2 (#1670).
- Fix :func:`.from_ragged_array` to work with read-only array input (#1744).
- Fix the handling of z coordinates :func:`shapely.ops.substring` (#1699).

Wheels are available for Python 3.12 (and still include GEOS 3.11.2). Building
from source is now compatible with Cython 3.

Acknowledgments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Thanks to everyone who contributed to this release!
People with a "+" by their names contributed a patch for the first time.

* Casper van der Wel
* Gareth Simons +
* Idan Miara
* Joris Van den Bossche
* Kyle Barron
* Marek Czaplicki +
* Mike Taves

.. _version-2-0-1:

Version 2.0.1 (2023-01-30)
--------------------------

Bug fixes:

- Fix regression in the ``Polygon()`` constructor taking a sequence of Points (#1662).
- Fix regression in the geometry constructors when passing ``decimal.Decimal``
  coordinate values (#1707).
- Fix ``STRtree()`` to not make the passed geometry array immutable as side-effect of
  the constructor (#1714).
- Fix the ``directed`` keyword in ``shapely.ops.linemerge()`` (#1695).

Improvements:

- Expose the function to get a matplotlib Patch object from a (Multi)Polygon (without
  already plotting it) publicly as :func:`shapely.plotting.patch_from_polygon` (#1704).

Acknowledgments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Thanks to everyone who contributed to this release!
People with a "+" by their names contributed a patch for the first time.

* Brendan Ward
* Erik Pettersson +
* Hood Chatham +
* Idan Miara +
* Joris Van den Bossche
* Martin Fleischmann
* Michał Górny +
* Sebastian Castro +


.. _version-2-0-0:

Version 2.0.0 (2022-12-12)
--------------------------

Shapely 2.0 version is a major release featuring a complete refactor of the
internals and new vectorized (element-wise) array operations, providing
considerable performance improvements (based on the developments in the
`PyGEOS <https://github.com/pygeos/pygeos>`__ package), along with several
breaking API changes and many feature improvements.

For more background, see
`RFC 1: Roadmap for Shapely 2.0 <https://github.com/shapely/shapely-rfc/pull/1>`__.


Refactor of the internals
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Shapely wraps the GEOS C++ library for use in Python. Before 2.0, Shapely
used ``ctypes`` to link to GEOS at runtime, but doing so resulted in extra
overhead and installation challenges. With 2.0, the internals of Shapely have
been refactored to expose GEOS functionality through a Python C extension
module that is compiled in advance.

The pointer to the actual GEOS Geometry object is stored in a lightweight
`Python extension type <https://docs.python.org/3/extending/newtypes_tutorial.html>`__.
A single `Geometry` Python extension type is defined in C wrapping a
`GEOSGeometry` pointer. This extension type is further subclassed in Python
to provide the geometry type-specific classes from Shapely (Point,
LineString, Polygon, etc).
The GEOS pointer is accessible from C as a static attribute of the Python
object (an attribute of the C struct that makes up a Python object), which
enables using vectorized functions within C and thus avoiding Python overhead
while looping over an array of geometries (see next section).


Vectorized (element-wise) geometry operations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before the 2.0 release, Shapely only provided an interface for scalar
(individual) geometry objects. Users had to loop over individual geometries
within an array of geometries and call scalar methods or properties, which is
both more verbose to use and has a large performance overhead.

Shapely 2.0 exposes GEOS operations as vectorized functions that operate
on arrays of geometries using a familiar NumPy interface. Those functions are
implemented as :ref:`NumPy universal functions <ufuncs>`
(or ufunc for short). A universal function is a function that operates on
n-dimensional arrays in an element-by-element fashion and supports array
broadcasting. All loops over geometries are implemented in C, which results
in substantial performance improvements when performing operations using many
geometries. This also allows operations to be less verbose.

NumPy is now a required dependency.

An example of this functionality using a small array of points and a single
polygon::

  >>> import shapely
  >>> from shapely import Point, box
  >>> import numpy as np
  >>> geoms = np.array([Point(0, 0), Point(1, 1), Point(2, 2)])
  >>> polygon = box(0, 0, 2, 2)

Before Shapely 2.0, a ``for`` loop was required to operate over an array of
geometries::

  >>> [polygon.contains(point) for point in geoms]
  [False,  True, False]

In Shapely 2.0, we can now compute whether the points are contained in the
polygon directly with one function call::

  >>> shapely.contains(polygon, geoms)
  array([False,  True, False])

This results in a considerable speedup, especially for larger arrays of
geometries, as well as a nicer user interface that avoids the need to write
``for`` loops. Depending on the operation, this can give a performance
increase with factors of 4x to 100x. In general, the greatest speedups are
for lightweight GEOS operations, such as ``contains``, which would previously
have been dominated by the high overhead of ``for`` loops in Python. See
https://caspervdw.github.io/Introducing-Pygeos/ for more detailed examples.

The new vectorized functions are available in the top-level ``shapely``
namespace. All the familiar geospatial methods and attributes from the
geometry classes now have an equivalent as top-level function (with some
small name deviations, such as the ``.wkt`` attribute being available as a
``to_wkt()`` function). Some methods from submodules (for example, several
functions from the ``shapely.ops`` submodule such as ``polygonize()``) are
also made available in a vectorized version as top-level function.

A full list of functions can be found in the API docs (see the pages listed under "API REFERENCE" in the left sidebar).

* Vectorized constructor functions
* Optionally output to a user-specified array (``out`` keyword argument) when constructing
  geometries from ``indices``.
* Enable bulk construction of geometries with different number of coordinates
  by optionally taking index arrays in all creation functions.


Shapely 2.0 API changes (deprecated in 1.8)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Shapely 1.8 release included several deprecation warnings about API
changes that would happen in Shapely 2.0 and that can be fixed in your code
(making it compatible with both <=1.8 and >=2.0). See :ref:`migration` for
more details on how to update your code.

It is highly recommended to first upgrade to Shapely 1.8 and resolve all
deprecation warnings before upgrading to Shapely 2.0.

Summary of changes:

* Geometries are now immutable and hashable.
* Multi-part geometries such as MultiPolygon no longer behave as "sequences".
  This means that they no longer have a length, are not iterable, and are not
  indexable anymore. Use the ``.geoms`` attribute instead to access
  individual parts of a multi-part geometry.
* Geometry objects no longer directly implement the numpy array interface to
  expose their coordinates. To convert to an array of coordinates, use the
  ``.coords`` attribute instead (``np.asarray(geom.coords)``).
* The following attributes and methods on the Geometry classes were
  previously deprecated and are now removed from Shapely 2.0:

  * ``array_interface()`` and ``ctypes``
  * ``asShape()``, and the adapters classes to create geometry-like proxy
    objects (use ``shape()`` instead).
  * ``empty()`` method

Some new deprecations have been introduced in Shapely 2.0:

* Directly calling the base class ``BaseGeometry()`` constructor or the
  ``EmptyGeometry()`` constructor is deprecated and will raise an error in
  the future. To create an empty geometry, use one of the subclasses instead,
  for example ``GeometryCollection()`` (#1022).
* The ``shapely.speedups`` module (the ``enable`` and ``disable`` functions)
  is deprecated and will be removed in the future. The module no longer has
  any affect in Shapely >=2.0.


Breaking API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some additional backwards incompatible API changes were included in Shapely
2.0 that were not deprecated in Shapely 1.8:

* Consistent creation of empty geometries (for example ``Polygon()`` now
  actually creates an empty Polygon instead of an empty geometry collection).
* The ``.bounds`` attribute of an empty geometry now returns a tuple of NaNs
  instead of an empty tuple (#1023).
* The ``preserve_topology`` keyword of ``simplify()`` now defaults to
  ``True`` (#1392).
* A ``GeometryCollection`` that consists of all empty sub-geometries now
  returns those empty geometries from its ``.geoms`` attribute instead of
  returning an empty list (#1420).
* The ``Point(..)`` constructor no longer accepts a sequence of coordinates
  consisting of more than one coordinate pair (previously, subsequent
  coordinates were ignored) (#1600).
* The unused ``shape_factory()`` method and ``HeterogeneousGeometrySequence``
  class are removed (#1421).
* The undocumented ``__geom__`` attribute has been removed. If necessary
  (although not recommended for use beyond experimentation), use the
  ``_geom`` attribute to access the raw GEOS pointer (#1417).
* The ``logging`` functionality has been removed. All error messages from
  GEOS are now raised as Python exceptions (#998).
* Several custom exception classes defined in ``shapely.errors`` that are no
  longer used internally have been removed. Errors from GEOS are now raised
  as ``GEOSException`` (#1306).

The ``STRtree`` interface has been substantially changed. See the section
:ref:`below <changelog-2-strtree>` for more details.

Additionally, starting with GEOS 3.11 (which is included in the binary wheels
on PyPI), the behaviour of the ``parallel_offset`` (``offset_curve``) method
changed regarding the orientation of the resulting line. With GEOS < 3.11,
the line retains the same direction for a left offset (positive distance) or
has opposite direction for a right offset (negative distance), and this
behaviour was documented as such in previous Shapely versions. Starting with
GEOS 3.11, the function tries to preserve the orientation of the original
line.

New features
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Geometry subclasses are now available in the top-level namespace
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following the new vectorized functions in the top-level ``shapely``
namespace, the Geometry subclasses (``Point``, ``LineString``, ``Polygon``,
etc) are now available in the top-level namespace as well. Thus it is no
longer needed to import those from the ``shapely.geometry`` submodule.

The following::

  from shapely.geometry import Point

can be replaced with::

  from shapely import Point

or::

  import shapely
  shapely.Point(...)

Note: for backwards compatibility (and being able to write code that works
for both <=1.8 and >2.0), those classes still remain accessible from the
``shapely.geometry`` submodule as well.


More informative repr with truncated WKT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The repr (``__repr__``) of Geometry objects has been simplified and improved
to include a descriptive Well-Known-Text (WKT) formatting. Instead of showing
the class name and id::

  >>> Point(0, 0)
  <shapely.geometry.point.Point at 0x7f0b711f1310>

we now get::

  >>> Point(0, 0)
  <POINT (0 0)>

For large geometries with many coordinates, the output gets truncated to 80
characters.


Support for fixed precision model for geometries and in overlay functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

GEOS 3.9.0 overhauled the overlay operations (union, intersection,
(symmetric) difference).  A complete rewrite, dubbed "OverlayNG", provides a
more robust implementation (no more TopologyExceptions even on valid input),
the ability to specify the output precision model, and significant
performance optimizations. When installing Shapely with GEOS >= 3.9 (which is
the case for PyPI wheels and conda-forge packages), you automatically get
these improvements (also for previous versions of Shapely) when using
the overlay operations.

Shapely 2.0 also includes the ability to specify the precision model
directly:

* The :func:`.set_precision` function can be used to conform a geometry to a
  certain grid size (may round and reduce coordinates), and this will then
  also be used by subsequent overlay methods. A :func:`.get_precision`
  function is also available to inspect the precision model of geometries.
* The ``grid_size`` keyword in the overlay methods can also be used to
  specify the precision model of the output geometry (without first
  conforming the input geometries).


Releasing the GIL for multithreaded applications
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Shapely itself is not multithreaded, but its functions generally allow for
multithreading by releasing the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) during
execution. Normally in Python, the GIL prevents multiple threads from
computing at the same time. Shapely functions internally release this
constraint so that the heavy lifting done by GEOS can be done in parallel,
from a single Python process.


.. _changelog-2-strtree:

STRtree API changes and improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The biggest change in the :class:`.STRtree` interface is that all operations
now return indices of the input tree or query geometries, instead of the
geometries itself. These indices can be used to index into anything
associated with the input geometries, including the input geometries
themselves, or custom items stored in another object of the same length and
order as the geometries.

In addition, Shapely 2.0 includes several improvements to ``STRtree``:

* Directly include predicate evaluation in :meth:`.STRtree.query` by
  specifying the ``predicate`` keyword. If a predicate is provided, tree
  geometries with bounding boxes that overlap the bounding boxes of the input
  geometries are further filtered to those that meet the predicate (using
  prepared geometries under the hood for efficiency).
* Query multiple input geometries (spatial join style) with
  :meth:`.STRtree.query` by passing an array of geometries. In this case, the
  return value is a 2D array with shape (2, n) where the subarrays correspond
  to the indices of the input geometries and indices of the tree geometries
  associated with each.
* A new :meth:`.STRtree.query_nearest` method was added, returning the index
  of the nearest geometries in the tree for each input geometry. Compared to
  :meth:`.STRtree.nearest`, which only returns the index of a single nearest
  geometry for each input geometry, this new methods allows for:

  * returning all equidistant nearest geometries,
  * excluding nearest geometries that are equal to the input,
  * specifying an ``max_distance`` to limit the search radius, potentially
    increasing the performance,
  * optionally returning the distance.

* Fixed ``STRtree`` creation to allow querying the tree in a multi-threaded
  context.

Bindings for new GEOS functionalities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Several (new) functions from GEOS are now exposed in Shapely:

* :func:`.hausdorff_distance` and :func:`.frechet_distance`
* :func:`.contains_properly`
* :func:`.extract_unique_points`
* :func:`.reverse`
* :func:`.node`
* :func:`.contains_xy` and :func:`.intersects_xy`
* :func:`.build_area` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* :func:`.minimum_bounding_circle` and :func:`.minimum_bounding_radius` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* :func:`.coverage_union` and :func:`.coverage_union_all` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* :func:`.segmentize` (GEOS >= 3.10)
* :func:`.dwithin` (GEOS >= 3.10)
* :func:`.remove_repeated_points` (GEOS >= 3.11)
* :func:`.line_merge` added `directed` parameter (GEOS > 3.11)
* :func:`.concave_hull` (GEOS >= 3.11)

In addition some aliases for existing methods have been added to provide a
method name consistent with GEOS or PostGIS:

* :func:`.line_interpolate_point` (``interpolate``)
* :func:`.line_locate_point` (``project``)
* :func:`.offset_curve` (``parallel_offset``)
* :func:`.point_on_surface` (``representative_point``)
* :func:`.oriented_envelope` (``minimum_rotated_rectangle``)
* :func:`.delaunay_triangles` (``ops.triangulate``)
* :func:`.voronoi_polygons` (``ops.voronoi_diagram``)
* :func:`.shortest_line` (``ops.nearest_points``)
* :func:`.is_valid_reason` (``validation.explain_validity``)


Getting information / parts / coordinates from geometries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A set of GEOS getter functions are now also exposed to inspect geometries:

* :func:`.get_dimensions`
* :func:`.get_coordinate_dimension`
* :func:`.get_srid`
* :func:`.get_num_points`
* :func:`.get_num_interior_rings`
* :func:`.get_num_geometries`
* :func:`.get_num_coordinates`
* :func:`.get_precision`

Several functions are added to extract parts: 

* :func:`.get_geometry` to get a geometry from a GeometryCollection or
  Multi-part geometry.
* :func:`.get_exterior_ring` and :func:`.get_interior_ring` to get one of the
  rings of a Polygon.
* :func:`.get_point` to get a point (vertex) of a linestring or linearring.
* :func:`.get_x`, :func:`.get_y` and :func:`.get_z` to get the x/y/z
  coordinate of a Point.

Methods to extract all parts or coordinates at once have been added:

* The :func:`.get_parts` function can be used to get individual parts of an
  array of multi-part geometries.
* The :func:`.get_rings` function, similar as ``get_parts`` but specifically
  to extract the rings of Polygon geometries.
* The :func:`.get_coordinates` function to get all coordinates from a
  geometry or array of geometries as an array of floats.

Each of those three functions has an optional ``return_index`` keyword, which
allows to also return the indexes of the original geometries in the source
array.


Prepared geometries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Prepared geometries are now no longer separate objects, but geometry objects
themselves can be prepared (this makes the ``shapely.prepared`` module
superfluous).

The :func:`.prepare()` function generates a GEOS prepared geometry which is
stored on the Geometry object itself. All binary predicates (except
``equals``) will make use of this if the input geometry has already been
prepared. Helper functions :func:`.destroy_prepared` and :func:`.is_prepared`
are also available.


New IO methods (GeoJSON, ragged arrays)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Added GeoJSON input/output capabilities :func:`.from_geojson` and
  :func:`.to_geojson` for GEOS >= 3.10.
* Added conversion to/from ragged array representation using a contiguous array
  of coordinates and offset arrays: :func:`.to_ragged_array` and
  :func:`.from_ragged_array`.

Other improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Added :func:`.force_2d` and :func:`.force_3d` to change the
  dimensionality of the coordinates in a geometry.
* Addition of a :func:`.total_bounds` function to return the outer bounds of an
  array of geometries.
* Added :func:`.empty` to create a geometry array pre-filled with None
  or with empty geometries.
* Performance improvement in constructing LineStrings or LinearRings from
  numpy arrays for GEOS >= 3.10.
* Updated the :func:`~shapely.box` ufunc to use internal C
  function for creating polygon (about 2x faster) and added ``ccw`` parameter
  to create polygon in counterclockwise (default) or clockwise direction.
* Start of a benchmarking suite using ASV.
* Added ``shapely.testing.assert_geometries_equal``.


Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~

* Fixed several corner cases in WKT and WKB serialization for varying GEOS
  versions, including:

  * Fixed the WKT serialization of single part 3D empty geometries to
    correctly include "Z" (for GEOS >= 3.9.0).
  * Handle empty points in WKB serialization by conversion to
    ``POINT (nan, nan)`` consistently for all GEOS versions (GEOS started
    doing this for >= 3.9.0).


Acknowledgments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Thanks to everyone who contributed to this release!
People with a "+" by their names contributed a patch for the first time.

* Adam J. Stewart +
* Alan D. Snow +
* Ariel Kadouri
* Bas Couwenberg
* Ben Beasley
* Brendan Ward +
* Casper van der Wel +
* Ewout ter Hoeven +
* Geir Arne Hjelle +
* James Gaboardi
* James Myatt +
* Joris Van den Bossche
* Keith Jenkins +
* Kian Meng Ang +
* Krishna Chaitanya +
* Kyle Barron
* Martin Fleischmann +
* Martin Lackner +
* Mike Taves
* Phil Chiu +
* Tanguy Ophoff +
* Tom Clancy
* Sean Gillies
* Giorgos Papadokostakis +
* Mattijn van Hoek +
* enrico ferreguti +
* gpapadok +
* mattijn +
* odidev +
