Shapely project governance and decision-making
==============================================

The purpose of this document is to formalize the governance process used by the
Shapely project in both ordinary and extraordinary situations, and to clarify
how decisions are made and how the various elements of our community interact,
including the relationship between open source collaborative development and
work that may be funded by for-profit or non-profit entities.

# Summary

Shapely is a community-owned and community-run project. To the maximum extent
possible, decisions about project direction are made by community consensus
(but note that “consensus” here has a somewhat technical meaning that might not
match everyone’s expectations – see below). Some members of the community
additionally contribute by serving on the Shapely steering council, where they
are responsible for facilitating the establishment of community consensus, for
stewarding project resources, and – in extreme cases – for making project
decisions if the normal community-based process breaks down.

# The project

The Shapely Project (The Project) is an open source software project. The goal
of The Project is to develop open source software for manipulation and analysis
of geometric objects in the cartesian plane in Python, and in particular the
shapely Python package, along with related software. The Software developed by
The Project is released under the BSD (or similar) open source license,
developed openly and hosted on public GitHub repositories under the shapely
GitHub organization.

The Project is developed by a team of distributed developers, called
Contributors. Contributors are individuals who have contributed code,
documentation, designs or other work to the Project. Anyone can be
a Contributor. Contributors can be affiliated with any legal entity or none.
Contributors participate in the project by submitting, reviewing and discussing
GitHub Pull Requests and Issues and participating in open and public Project
discussions on GitHub, mailing lists, and other channels. The foundation of
Project participation is openness and transparency.

The Project Community consists of all Contributors and Users of the Project.
Contributors work on behalf of and are responsible to the larger Project
Community and we strive to keep the barrier between Contributors and Users as
low as possible.

Shapely relies on the [GEOS project](https://libgeos.org) and expresses, in
Python, much of the GEOS API. The sets of contributors for these projects
overlap, but they are organized separately and have different forms of
governance.

# Governance

This section describes the governance and leadership model of The Project.

The foundations of Project governance are:

* Openness & Transparency
* Active Contribution
* Institutional Neutrality

## Consensus-based decision making by the community

Normally, all project decisions will be made by consensus of all interested
Contributors. The primary goal of this approach is to ensure that the people
who are most affected by and involved in any given change can contribute their
knowledge in the confidence that their voices will be heard, because thoughtful
review from a broad community is the best mechanism we know of for creating
high-quality software.

The mechanism we use to accomplish this goal may be unfamiliar for those who
are not experienced with the cultural norms around free/open-source software
development. We provide a summary here, and highly recommend that all
Contributors additionally read [Chapter 4: Social and Political
Infrastructure](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#social-infrastructure)
of Karl Fogel’s classic *Producing Open Source Software*, and in particular the
section on [Consensus-based
Democracy](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#consensus-democracy),
for a more detailed discussion.

In this context, consensus does not require:

* that we wait to solicit everybody’s opinion on every change,
* that we ever hold a vote on anything,
* or that everybody is happy or agrees with every decision.

For us, what consensus means is that we entrust everyone with the right to veto
any change if they feel it necessary. While this may sound like a recipe for
obstruction and pain, this is not what happens. Instead, we find that most
people take this responsibility seriously, and only invoke their veto when they
judge that a serious problem is being ignored, and that their veto is necessary
to protect the project. And in practice, it turns out that such vetoes are
almost never formally invoked, because their mere possibility ensures that
Contributors are motivated from the start to find some solution that everyone
can live with – thus accomplishing our goal of ensuring that all interested
perspectives are taken into account.

How do we know when consensus has been achieved? In principle, this is rather
difficult, since consensus is defined by the absence of vetos, which requires
us to somehow prove a negative. In practice, we use a combination of our best
judgement (e.g., a simple and uncontroversial bug fix posted on GitHub and
reviewed by a core developer is probably fine) and best efforts (e.g., all
substantive API changes must be posted to the mailing list in order to give the
broader community a chance to catch any problems and suggest improvements; we
assume that anyone who cares enough about Shapely to invoke their veto right
should be on the mailing list). If no-one bothers to comment on the mailing
list after a few days, then it’s probably fine. And worst case, if a change is
more controversial than expected, or a crucial critique is delayed because
someone was on vacation, then it’s no big deal: we apologize for misjudging the
situation, [back up, and sort things
out](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#version-control-relaxation).

If one does need to invoke a formal veto, then it should consist of:

* an unambiguous statement that a veto is being invoked,
* an explanation of why it is being invoked, and
* a description of what conditions (if any) would convince the vetoer to
  withdraw their veto.

If all proposals for resolving some issue are vetoed, then the status quo wins
by default.

In the worst case, if a Contributor is genuinely misusing their veto in an
obstructive fashion to the detriment of the project, then they can be ejected
from the project by consensus of the Steering Council – see below.

## Steering Council

The Project will have a Steering Council that consists of Project Contributors
who have produced contributions that are substantial in quality and quantity,
and sustained over at least one year. The overall role of the Council is to
ensure, with input from the Community, the long-term well-being of the project,
both technically and as a community.

During the everyday project activities, council members participate in all
discussions, code review and other project activities as peers with all other
Contributors and the Community. In these everyday activities, Council Members
do not have any special power or privilege through their membership on the
Council. However, it is expected that because of the quality and quantity of
their contributions and their expert knowledge of the Project Software and
Services that Council Members will provide useful guidance, both technical and
in terms of project direction, to potentially less experienced contributors.

The Steering Council and its Members play a special role in certain situations.
In particular, the Council may, if necessary:

* Make decisions about the overall scope, vision and direction of the project.
* Make decisions about strategic collaborations with other organizations or
  individuals.
* Make decisions about specific technical issues, features, bugs and pull
  requests. They are the primary mechanism of guiding the code review process
  and merging pull requests.
* Make decisions about the Services that are run by The Project and manage
  those Services for the benefit of the Project and Community.
* Update policy documents such as this one.
* Make decisions when regular community discussion doesn’t produce consensus on
  an issue in a reasonable time frame.

However, the Council's primary responsibility is to facilitate the ordinary
community-based decision making procedure described above. If we ever have to
step in and formally override the community for the health of the Project, then
we will do so, but we will consider reaching this point to indicate a failure
in our leadership.

### Council membership

A list of current Steering Council Members is maintained at the page [TBD].

To become eligible to join the Steering Council, an individual must be
a Project Contributor who has produced contributions that are substantial in
quality and quantity, and sustained over at least one year. Potential Council
Members are nominated by existing Council members, and become members following
consensus of the existing Council members, and confirmation that the potential
Member is interested and willing to serve in that capacity. The Council will be
initially formed from the set of existing Core Developers who, as of May 2023,
have been significantly active over the last year.

When considering potential Members, the Council will look at candidates with
a comprehensive view of their contributions. This will include but is not
limited to code, code review, infrastructure work, mailing list and chat
participation, community help/building, education and outreach, design work,
etc. We are deliberately not setting arbitrary quantitative metrics (like “100
commits in this repo”) to avoid encouraging behavior that plays to the metrics
rather than the project’s overall well-being. We want to encourage a diverse
array of backgrounds, viewpoints and talents in our team, which is why we
explicitly do not define code as the sole metric on which council membership
will be evaluated.

If a Council member becomes inactive in the project for a period of one year,
they will be considered for removal from the Council. Before removal, inactive
Member will be approached to see if they plan on returning to active
participation. If not they will be removed immediately upon a Council vote. If
they plan on returning to active participation soon, they will be given a grace
period of one year. If they don’t return to active participation within that
time period they will be removed by vote of the Council without further grace
period. All former Council members can be considered for membership again at
any time in the future, like any other Project Contributor. Retired Council
members will be listed on the project website, acknowledging the period during
which they were active in the Council.

The Council reserves the right to eject current Members, if they are deemed to
be actively harmful to the project’s well-being, and attempts at communication
and conflict resolution have failed. This requires the consensus of the
remaining Members.

### Council decision making

If it becomes necessary for the Steering Council to produce a formal decision,
then they will use a form of the Apache Foundation voting process. This is
a formalized version of consensus, in which +1 votes indicate agreement, -1
votes are vetoes (and must be accompanied with a rationale, as above), and one
can also vote fractionally (e.g. -0.5, +0.5) if one wishes to express an
opinion without registering a full veto. These numeric votes are also often
used informally as a way of getting a general sense of people's feelings on
some issue, and should not normally be taken as formal votes. A formal vote
only occurs if explicitly declared, and if this does occur then the vote should
be held open for long enough to give all interested Council Members a chance to
respond -- at least one week.

In practice, we anticipate that for most Steering Council decisions (e.g.,
voting in new members) a more informal process will suffice.

### Conflict of interest

It is expected that the Council Members will be employed at a wide range of
companies, universities and non-profit organizations. Because of this, it is
possible that Members will have conflict of interests. Such conflict of
interests include, but are not limited to:

* Financial interests, such as investments, employment or contracting work,
  outside of The Project that may influence their work on The Project.
* Access to proprietary information of their employer that could potentially
  leak into their work with the Project.

All members of the Council shall disclose to the rest of the Council any
conflict of interest they may have. Members with a conflict of interest in
a particular issue may participate in Council discussions on that issue, but
must recuse themselves from voting on the issue.

### Private communications of the Council

To the maximum extent possible, Council discussions and activities will be
public and done in collaboration and discussion with the Project Contributors
and Community. The Council will have a private mailing list that will be used
sparingly and only when a specific matter requires privacy. When private
communications and decisions are needed, the Council will do its best to
summarize those to the Community after eliding personal/private/sensitive
information that should not be posted to the public internet.

# Institutional partners and funding

[There is no funding today. Institutional partners are the companies that
employ contributors to, in part, work on Shapely. This section is about
defining "Institutional partner", not about enumerating them. We'll borrow from
Jupyter and NumPy.]

The Steering Council are the primary leadership for the project. No outside
institution, individual or legal entity has the ability to own, control, usurp
or influence the project other than by participating in the Project as
Contributors and Council Members. However, because institutions can be an
important funding mechanism for the project, it is important to formally
acknowledge institutional participation in the project. These are Institutional
Partners.

An Institutional Contributor is any individual Project Contributor who
contributes to the project as part of their official duties at an Institutional
Partner. Likewise, an Institutional Council Member is any Project Steering
Council Member who contributes to the project as part of their official duties
at an Institutional Partner.

With these definitions, an Institutional Partner is any recognized legal entity
in the United States or elsewhere that employs at least 1 Institutional
Contributor of Institutional Council Member. Institutional Partners can be
for-profit or non-profit entities.

Institutions become eligible to become an Institutional Partner by employing
individuals who actively contribute to The Project as part of their official
duties. To state this another way, the only way for a Partner to influence the
project is by actively contributing to the open development of the project, in
equal terms to any other member of the community of Contributors and Council
Members. Merely using Project Software in institutional context does not allow
an entity to become an Institutional Partner. Financial gifts do not enable an
entity to become an Institutional Partner. Once an institution becomes eligible
for Institutional Partnership, the Steering Council must nominate and approve
the Partnership.

If at some point an existing Institutional Partner stops having any
contributing employees, then a one year grace period commences. If at the end
of this one year period they continue not to have any contributing employees,
then their Institutional Partnership will lapse, and resuming it will require
going through the normal process for new Partnerships.

An Institutional Partner is free to pursue funding for their work on The
Project through any legal means. This could involve a non-profit organization
raising money from private foundations and donors or a for-profit company
building proprietary products and services that leverage Project Software and
Services. Funding acquired by Institutional Partners to work on The Project is
called Institutional Funding. However, no funding obtained by an Institutional
Partner can override the Steering Council. If a Partner has funding to do
Shapely work and the Council decides to not pursue that work as a project, the
Partner is free to pursue it on their own. However in this situation, that part
of the Partner’s work will not be under the Shapely umbrella and cannot use the
Project trademarks in a way that suggests a formal relationship.

Institutional Partner benefits are:

* Acknowledgement on the shapely websites, in talks and T-shirts.
* Ability to acknowledge their own funding sources on the shapely websites, in
  talks and T-shirts.
* Ability to influence the project through the participation of their Council
  Member.
* Council Members invited to Shapely Developer Meetings.

A list of current Institutional Partners is maintained at the page [TBD].

# Document history

https://github.com/shapely/shapely/governance.md

# Acknowledgements

Substantial portions of this document were adapted from the governance
documents of the [Jupyter/IPython](https://github.com/jupyter/governance) and
[NumPy](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/main/doc/source/dev/governance/governance.rst)
projects.

# License

To the extent possible under law, the authors have waived all copyright and
related or neighboring rights to the Shapely project governance and
decision-making document, as per the [CC-0 public domain dedication
/ license](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
